docs: :memo: update resource guide (#1449)
seedcase-project/seedcase-sprout: docs/guide/resources.qmd

clean and transform the data. Either way, the tidy data needs to be read
into a Polars DataFrame before you can use it in Sprout.
:::

The steps you'll take to get your data into the structure used by Sprout
are:

<!-- TODO: update when finished with updating the rest of the guide -->

1.  Create the properties for the resource, using the original data as a
    starting point, and then edit the resource properties as needed.
2.  Create the folders for the new resource within the package and save
    the resource properties in the `datapackage.json` file.
3.  Optionally store the raw data in a `raw/` folder in the package, so
    that you can keep the original data separate from the tided data.
4.  Tidy the data as needed and converting into a Polars DataFrame (if
    it isn't already) before adding it to the resource.
5.  Add your tidy data as a batch of data to the resource.
6.  Merge the data batches into a new resource data file.
7.  Re-build the data package's `README.md` file from the updated
    `datapackage.json` file.
8.  If you need to update the properties at a later point, you can use
    `update_resource_properties()` and then write the result to the

>     `datapackage.json` file.

Reviewer: Oooo good catch! Will fix.

2.  Create the folders for the new resource within the package and save
    the resource properties in the `datapackage.json` file.
3.  Optionally store the raw data in a `raw/` folder in the package, so
    that you can keep the original data separate from the tidied data.
4.  Tidy the data as needed and convert it into a Polars DataFrame (if
    you haven't already) before adding it to the resource.
5.  Add your tidy data as a batch of data to the resource.
6.  Merge the data batches into a new resource data file.
7.  Re-build the data package's `README.md` file from the updated
    `datapackage.json` file.

> 8.  If you need to update the properties at a later point, you would
>     edit the resource properties script, run the `main.py` file to
>     re-create the properties, and then write the properties to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8.  If you need to update the properties at a later point, you would
    edit the resource properties script and run the `main.py` file to
    re-create the properties and write them to the
```
Just because writing is part of `main.py` in the guide

raw_data_patients.head(5)
```

## Extracting properties from the data

Before you can store resource data in your data package, you need to
describe its [properties](/docs/glossary.qmd). The resource's properties
are what allow other people to understand what your data is about and to
use it more easily.

The resource's properties also define what it means for data in the
resource to be correct, as all data in the resource must match the
properties. Sprout checks that the properties are correctly filled in
and that no required properties fields are missing. It also checks that
the data matches the properties, so that you can be sure that data
actually contains what you expect it to contain.

Like with the package properties, you will create a properties script
for the resource that allows you to easily edit the properties later on.
You can do this by using the `create_properties_script()` function. This
function needs the `resource_name` and optionally the `fields` (i.e.,
columns or variables) that you want to include in the resource.

The `resource_name` is the name of the resource, which is used to
identify the resource in the data package. It is required and *should

> not* be changed, since it's used in the file name of the resource

Reviewer: Oooo maybe? I'll make this an issue that we can come back to later.

    # Write the README text to a `README.md` file.
    sp.write_file(readme_text, sp.PackagePath().readme())

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

Then run the `main.py` file in your Terminal, which will create the
resource properties script:

``` {.bash filename="Terminal"}
uv run main.py
```

```{python}
#| include: false
# Run to confirm the code works.
raw_data_patients = pl.read_csv(package_path.root() / "raw" / "patients.csv")
field_properties = sp.extract_field_properties(data=raw_data_patients)
sp.create_resource_properties_script(
        resource_name="patients",
        fields=field_properties,
        path=package_path.root()
    )
```

Your folders and files should now look like:

```{python}
#| echo: false
print(file_tree(package_path.root()))
```

## Writing the resource properties

Open the newly created `scripts/resource_properties_patients.py` file in
order to make edits to it. See the full contents in the callout block
below.

::: {.callout-note collapse="true"}
## `scripts/resource_properties_patients.py` content

```{python}
#| echo: false
print(package_path.resource_properties_script("patients").read_text())
```

```{python}

> #| filename: "scripts/resource_properties_patients.py"

Reviewer: Oh, oops, forgot to delete that!

print(sp.read_properties(package_path.properties()))
```

```{=html}
<!--
TODO: pprint doesn't work well with nested objects like resource_properties above.
So, for now, we'll use print here. but, we should find an alternative.
-->
```

::: callout-note
If you need to update the resource properties later on, you can simply
edit the `scripts/resource_properties_patients.py` file and then re-run
the `main.py` file to update the `datapackage.json` file and the
`README.md` file.
:::

## Storing a backup of the data as a batch file

<!-- TODO: I'm not sure how effective this workflow is, we'll assess as we use it -->

::: callout-note
See the [flow diagrams](/docs/design/interface/flows.qmd) for a
simplified flow of steps involved in adding batch files. Also see the
[design docs](/docs/design/interface/outputs.qmd) for why we include
these batch files in the resource's folder.
:::

> Batch files are used to store data in a data package each time you add

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each time you add new or modified data to a resource, this data is
```

> new or modified data to a resource. These batch files will be used to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stored in a batch file. These batch files will be used to
```

create the final data file that is actually used as the resource at the
path `resource/<name>/data.parquet`. The first time a batch file is
saved, it will create the folders necessary for the resource.

As shown above, the data is currently loaded as a Polars DataFrame
called `raw_data_patients`. Now, it's time to store this data in the
resource's folder by using the `write_resource_batch()` function in the
`main.py` file.

```{python}
#| filename: "main.py"
#| eval: false
# This code is shortened to only show what was changed.
# Add this to the imports.
from scripts.resource_properties_patients import resource_properties_patients

def main():
    # Previous code is excluded to keep it short.

>     # New code inserted to the bottom -----

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # New code inserted at the bottom -----
```

    # Save the batch data.
    sp.write_resource_batch(
        data=raw_data_patients,
        resource_properties=resource_properties_patients
    )
```

```{python}
#| include: false
# Only to check that it runs.
sp.write_resource_batch(
    data=raw_data_patients,
    resource_properties=resource_properties_patients,
    package_path=package_path.root()
)
```

This function uses the properties object to determine where to store the
data as a batch file, which is in the `batch/` folder of the resource's
folder. If this is the first time adding a batch file, all the folders
will be set up. So the file structure should look like this now:

```{python}
print(file_tree(package_path.root()))
```

## Building the resource data file

Now that you've stored the data as a batch file, you can build the
`resource/<name>/data.parquet` file that will be used as the data
resource. This Parquet file is built from all the data in the `batch/`
folder. Since there is only one batch data file stored in the resource's
folder, only this one will be used to build the data resource's Parquet

> file. Before you can create this main Parquet file, you need to read in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
file. To create this main Parquet file, you need to read in
```

all the batch files, join them together, and, optionally, do any
additional processing on the data before writing it to the file. The

> functions are `read_resource_batches()`, `join_resource_batches()`, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
functions to use are `read_resource_batches()`, `join_resource_batches()`, and
```

`write_resource_data()`. Several of these functions will internally run
checks via `check_data()`.

Let's add these functions to the `main.py` file to make the
`data.parquet` file:

```{python}
#| filename: "main.py"
#| eval: false
# This code is shortened to only show what was changed.
def main():
    # Previous code is excluded to keep it short.

>     # New code inserted to the bottom -----

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # New code inserted at the bottom -----
```
